# **MatrixOne v0.8.0 Release Notes**

We are excited to announce MatrixOne 0.8.0 release. After four months' development, MatrixOne completed its architecture design with Proxy module, which ensures workload and tenant isolation. MatrixOne has also made much improvement with its OLTP and OLAP performance, along with its scalability, stability and user experience. This is also a Beta release, open for developers for testing and feedback. Cheers!

## Docker

- General Image:

```
docker pull matrixorigin/matrixone:0.8.0
```

- If you are using the network in mainland China, you can pull the image on Alibaba Cloud:

```
docker pull registry.cn-shanghai.aliyuncs.com/matrixorigin/matrixone:0.8.0
```

## Key Points

### Performance

- OLTP performance: 3-7x improvement, reaching MySQL performance in standalone version.
- OLAP performance: SSB and TPCH performance align with Snowflake and Clickhouse.
- Scalability: archiving near-linear performance growth with CN horizontal scaling.

### Improved Usability

- Backward compatibility of data storage format.
- Deployment and administration tool for both standalone and distributed version.
- Improved MySQL compatibility in case sensitivity, information_schema and DDL statements.
- Read committed with pessimistic locking implemented in transaction mode. (Experimental)

### Other Features

- Support window function `RANK()`, `ROW_NUMBER()` and `DENSE_RANK()`
- Support the `BINARY` type and related functions.
- Support data sharing between tenants and `PUBLISH`/`SUBSCRIBE` functions.
- Support `INSERT...ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE` statement.
- Add `Sequence` and related statements.
- Support `ADD [COLUMN] | DROP [COLUMN]` in the `ALTER TABLE` statement.
- Support multi-layer foreign key.
- Support `RAND()` built-in function.
- Support setting global variables in configuration files.
- Secure initial MatrixOne account by password replacement.
- Several types of partitioning are supported. (Experimental)

## Known Issues

- 0.8.0 data format is not compatible with the previous versions.
- Secondary Key doesn't improve any performance.
- Memory leak occasionally happens and may lead to an `OOM` error.
- Workload isolation is only supported by JDBC.
- DN is a single point of failure for distributed version.
- Occasional system hung under high concurrency workload.
- Pessimistic transaction has a few fatal bugs remaining.

## Contributors

### New Contributors

* @zengyan1
* @forsaken628
* @gavinyue
* @gouhongshen
* @WitcherTheWhite

We appreciate your contribution! Welcome to MatrixOne community.

## Full Changelog

<https://github.com/matrixorigin/matrixone/compare/v0.7.0...v0.8.0>
