# Vectors

## What Are Vectors

In a database, vectors typically consist of organized sets of numbers arranged in a specific manner to represent various data or characteristics. These vectors can exist in one-dimensional, multidimensional, or even higher-dimensional data structures. In machine learning and data analysis, vectors represent data points, features, or model parameters.

## Advantages of Vectors

A database's capacity to handle vectors signifies its ability to store, query, and analyze vector data. These vectors frequently play a crucial role in intricate data analysis, machine learning, and mining endeavors. Here are several benefits associated with a database that possesses vector capabilities:

- **Support for Multiple Application Domains:** Vector capabilities make a database suitable for various application domains, including facial recognition, recommendation systems, and genomics analysis.

- **High-Performance Analytics:** Databases can accelerate complex data analysis tasks by performing high-performance queries and analytical operations on vector data. This is crucial for large-scale datasets and real-time data processing.

- **Similarity Searches:** Vector capabilities enable the database to perform similarity search operations, such as finding the closest vectors to a given vector in the database. This is highly useful in applications like recommendation systems and search engines.

- **Dimensional Flexibility:** Vector capabilities typically support vectors of different dimensions, allowing the database to handle various data types and features.

- **Integration with Machine Learning:** Databases that support vector storage and querying can integrate seamlessly with machine learning models, making model training and inference more efficient and convenient.

## Before you start

Before reading this document, make sure that the following tasks are completed:

- Build a MatrixOne Cluster in MatrixOne.
- Read the [Database Schema Design Overview](overview.md).
- The database has been created.

## How to Use Vectors

The syntax for using vectors is the same as that for regular table creation, data insertion, and data querying:

### Creating

Using the following SQL statement, you can create two vector columns, one of type Float32 and the other of type Float64. You can also set the dimensions for both vector columns to 3.

```
create table t1(a int, b vecf32(3), c vecf64(3));
```

### Inserting

MatrixOne supports inserting vectors in two formats.

**Textual Format**

```sql
insert into t1 values(1, "[1,2,3]", "[4,5,6]");
```

**Binary Format**

Suppose you are working with Python NumPy arrays. In that case, you can directly insert the NumPy array into MatrixOne by performing hexadecimal encoding on the array instead of converting it into a comma-separated textual format. This approach is faster when inserting vectors with higher dimensions.

```sql
insert into t1 (a, b) values
(2, decode("7e98b23e9e10383b2f41133f", "hex"));

-- "7e98b23e9e10383b2f41133f" represents the hexadecimal encoding of the little-endian []float32{0.34881967, 0.0028086076, 0.5752134}

-- "hex" represents hexadecimal encoding
```

### Querying

Vector columns can also be read in two formats.

**Textual Format**

```sql
mysql> select a, b from t1;
+------+---------------------------------------+
| a    | b                                     |
+------+---------------------------------------+
|    1 | [1, 2, 3]                             |
|    2 | [0.34881967, 0.0028086076, 0.5752134] |
+------+---------------------------------------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

**Binary Format**

The binary format is very useful if you need to directly read the vector result set into a NumPy array with minimal conversion cost.

```sql
mysql> select encode(b, "hex") from t1;
+--------------------------+
| encode(b, hex)           |
+--------------------------+
| 0000803f0000004000004040 |
| 7e98b23e9e10383b2f41133f |
+--------------------------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## Example - Top K Queries

Top K queries are a database query operation that retrieves the top K data items or records from a database. Top K queries can be applied in various scenarios, including recommendation systems, search engines, data analysis and sorting.

First, we create a table named `t1` that contains vector data `b` and insert some sample data. Then, we perform top K queries using the given SQL statements for `l1_distance`, `l2_distance`, cosine similarity, and cosine distance, limiting the results to the top 5 matches.

```sql
-- Sample table 't1' with vector data 'b'
CREATE TABLE t1 (
    id int,
    b vecf64(3)
);

-- Insert some sample data
INSERT INTO t1 (id,b) VALUES (1, '[1,2,3]'), (2, '[4,5,6]'), (3, '[2,1,1]'), (4, '[7,8,9]'), (5, '[0,0,0]'), (6, '[3,1,2]');

-- Top K Queries using l1_distance
SELECT * FROM t1 ORDER BY l1_norm(b - '[3,1,2]') LIMIT 5;

-- Top K Queries using l2_distance
SELECT * FROM t1 ORDER BY l2_norm(b - '[3,1,2]') LIMIT 5;

-- Top K Queries using cosine similarity
SELECT * FROM t1 ORDER BY cosine_similarity(b, '[3,1,2]') LIMIT 5;

-- Top K Queries using cosine distance
SELECT * FROM t1 ORDER BY 1 - cosine_similarity(b, '[3,1,2]') LIMIT 5;
```

These queries demonstrate retrieving the top 5 vectors most similar to the given vector `[3,1,2]` using different distance and similarity measures. With these queries, you can find the data that best matches your target vector based on different measurement criteria.

## Best Practices

- **Casting between Vectors:** When casting a vector from one type to another, it is also advisable to specify the dimension. For instance:

    ```
    SELECT b + CAST("[1,2,3]" AS vecf32(3)) FROM t1;
    ```

    This practice ensures accuracy and consistency in vector-type conversions.

- **Utilizing Binary Format:** To enhance overall insertion performance, consider using binary rather than textual format. Ensure the array is in little-endian format before converting it into hexadecimal encoding. Here's a sample Python code:

    ```python
    import binascii
    
    # 'value' is a NumPy object
    def to_binary(value):
        if value is None:
            return value
    
       # Little-endian float array
       value = np.asarray(value, dtype='<f')

       if value.ndim != 1:
           raise ValueError('expected ndim to be 1')

       return binascii.b2a_hex(value)
    ```

    This approach can significantly improve data insertion efficiency.

## Constriants

- Currently MatrixOne Vector type supports float32 and float64 types.
- Vector cannot be Primary Key or Unique Key.
- Vector maximum dimension is 65536.

Certainly, let's refine the original text in English:

## Reference

For more documentation on vector functions, see:

- [inner_product()](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/inner_product.md)
- [l1_norm()](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/l1_norm.md)
- [l2_norm()](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/l2_norm.md)
- [cosine_similarity()](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/cosine_similarity.md)
- [vector_dims()](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/vector_dims.md)
- [Arithemetic Operators](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/arithmetic.md)
- [Misc Functions](../../Reference/Functions-and-Operators/1.1-Vector/misc.md)
